# CSE185_Proj: t-sKNEE

This package implements tsne analysis and plotting. The main tsne calculation function `tsKNEE` takes in an anndata object and outputs a n_obs x 2 array that contains the x and y coordinates for each sample. The tsne plotting function `tsKNEE_plot` takes an anndata obect and generates a tsne plot. 

t-sKNEE implements the functions `scanpy.tl.tsne` and `sc.pl.tsne`. For more information about these functions visit [scanpy](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/tools.html) page.

## Installation
First, the user needs to clone the repository using the following command ```git clone https://github.com/JL-Young/CSE185_Proj.git```
The user needs to have the following libraries installed: `matplotlib.pyplot`, `numpy`, `scanpy` as well as `leidenalg`. These packages can be found in `requirements.txt`. The following lines of code can be run in command line for for installing these packages.

```
pip install -r requirements.txt 
```
Once the required libraries are installed, you can install `t_sKNEE` with the following command.
```python setup.py install```

If you do not have admin access, the packages can be installed using the following commands.
```
pip install --user -r requirements.txt
python setup.py install --user
```

## Basic usage

`tsKNEE` is designed to be used in a python notebook or script. The user can create a notebook within the directory and import the package using the line `import tsKNEE`. Upon doing so, the user can import their data of choice and store it as an anndata object. The following lines of code below serve as an example of how to set up for `tsKNEE` usage. More examples can be seen in the "tskNEE/test_tsKNEE.ipynb" jupyter notebook. 

```
adata = sc.read_h5ad("../small_test_data/small_test_data1.h5ad")
sc.pp.neighbors(tsne_adata)
sc.tl.leiden(tsne_adata) 
```


There are two functions you can run within `tsKNEE`- `tsKNEE` and `tsKNEE_plot`. The only required parameters for both functions is an anndata object. See Data Processing section for more information on the anndata object.

The basic usage of `tsKNEE` is: 
```
tsKNEE(adata, T=1000, perp = 30)
```
- `T=1000`: the number of iterations tsKNEE goes through to plot samples with according to a similarity matrix
- `perp=30`: the perplexity 

The basic usage of `tsKNEE_plot` is: 
```
tsKNEE_plot(adata, perp = 30, xlabel = "tsne1", ylabel = "tsne 2", title = "", save = None)
```
- `xlabel = "tsne1"`: the x-axis label for the graph
- `ylabel = "tsne 2"`: the y-axis label for the graph
- `title = ""`: the graph title
- `save = None`: the name of the png saved (string)

## Data preprocessing

The input adata object needs to be **Leiden clustered** in both `tsKNEE` and `tsKNEE_plot`. The anndata object needs to have a column named `leiden` in `anndata.obs` dataframe storing the cluster information for the sample. Before using `tsKNEE_plot`, the input anndata object must also have `X_tsne` within `anndata.obsm` which is the output of the `tsKNEE` function. 

The desired quality control should be done previous to using t-sKNEE. 

## Testing 

To run `tsKNEE` and `tsKNEE_plot` on a small test example run all cells up to cell 8 in `test_tsKNEE.ipynb`. Cell 8 gives coordinates of each sample in the test data for tsKNEE plotting. 

## Benchmarking

## Contributors

This repository was generated by Jane Li, Jeyasri Venkatasurbamani, and James Young with inspiration from the [Medium](https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-t-sne-by-implementing-2baf3a987ab3).


# Origin of Data

Data is taken from CSE185 Lab 6 that was originally taken from the this paper [Functional, metabolic and transcriptional maturation of human pancreatic islets derived from stem cells](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-022-01219-z.pdf) and this [GEO website](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSM5114474). 

# Method
The dataset `GSM5114474_M3_E7` is read in as anndata object. Cells with less than 200 genes expressed and less than 1000 total reads are filtered out. Genes detected in less than 5 cells and genes that have total count of less than 15 is filtered out. 

A random list is generated for the obs and vars. The whole dataset is subsetted by the value of the random number to aroudn 50 obs x 1000 vars. However everytime, the script is ran, the dataset will differ. The anndata is then saved to `h5ad` file format (currently commented out). 

test_data1 has 69 obs x 942 vars.
